Madame Récamier (1920 film)
Cast
Fern Andra as Madame Récamier
Bernd Aldor as Talma
Albert Steinrück
Ferdinand von Alten as Napoleon Bonaparte
Johanna Mund as Joséphine de Beauharnais
Viktor Senger as Pierre Bernard
Else Wasa as Marie
Rudolf Lettinger as Jacques Récamier
Hermann Böttcher as Fouche
Adolf E. Licho as Robert
Emil Rameau as Dufrand
Walter Formes as Graf Artois
Doris Schlegel as Blanche
Boris Michailow as Constand
References


Jacques-Rose Récamier
Life
The Récamier family originated in Bugey, a region which then specialised in the leather trade and trading with Geneva. Jacques-Rose was the son of François Récamier (1709-1782), who had been born in Belley and owned several hat shops as well as managing a bank in Lyon. Jacques-Rose's mother was Emmeraude Delaroche (1725-1777), daughter of a bookseller and printer from Lyon.
In 1782 he took over the bank founded by his father and as Jacques Récamier & Cie it nurtured links with high-finance in Geneva, maintained branches in Cadiz and Madrid and had links with British financiers and trading houses on La Réunion. It was probably involved in trading dollars alongside the French East India Company in the 1780s.In Lyon on 24 April 1793 Jacques-Rose Récamier married the 15-year-old Jeanne Françoise Julie Adélaïde Bernard, later known as  Juliette Récamier. She was the daughter of Julie Matton and Jean Bernard (? - 1828), a notary in Lyon who had been made the receiver of finances in Paris in 1784 by Calonne (remaining so until dismissed by Napoleon in 1807). Récamier escaped prison during the Reign of Terror thanks to support from politicians surrounding Cambacérès. In June 1796 he, the Genevan banker Jean-Frédéric Perrégaux and others founded the Caisse des comptes courants, of which Récamier became one of the administrators. He later exchanged his shares in it for shares in the Banque de France, becoming one of the latter's régents on 16 February 1800. At its first shareholders' meeting on 21 April 1800, he took seat 9, holding it until his resignation on 17 October 1806.
On 16 October 1798, Récamier bought two vast properties formerly belonging to Jacques Necker on what was then rue du Mont-Blanc (corresponding to the present-day 7 rue de la Chaussée-d'Antin) for 37383 silver piastres (equivalent to at least 200000 of that era) to avoid the assignat. His wife Juliette gave her first soirées there, "balls whose luxury is extraordinary: the dancers' fans and bouquets are renewed as often as the heat of the dance alters their freshness and, what is more, shoes are provided, by foresight, unnoticed, by fairies, prevents anyone changing from a gavotte to a sauteuse with a sagging shoe, or from leaving the ball like Cinderella". At the end of 1798, he and the banker Alexandre Barrillon founded Syndicat du Commerce, a bank based on rue du Mont-Blanc. Barillon was quite close to him and was his partner in various matters related to the Spanish and Montpellier wool trade - they also both supplied the French army.
Between 1798 and 1806, Récamier became one of the state bankers, an essential pillar of Napoleon I's financial system, but he and his wife were distrusted by Napoleon for their support of figures such as general Moreau and for her salons, which gave rise to the first critics of Napoleon and his policies. In March 1800, Récamier joined the bankers Perregaux, Le Couteulx, Mallet, Barrillon, Germain, Sévène, Bastide, Fulchiron and Doyen in founding the Négociants réunis and advancing over 3 million francs to the Armée d'Italie and the Rhin to cover their campaign expenses, as commissioners of the treasury. From October 1801 to September 1802, the association of "Banquiers du Trésor public" founded by Perregaux, Mallet, Fulchiron, Récamier and Doyen advanced over 30 million francs against the obligations of the receivers general guaranteed by the Caisse d'amortissement.
In 1803 Napoleon ordered her salon closed as part of a massive operation against the conspirators  Cadoudal and Pichegru, in which Germaine de Staël was exiled. In November 1805 Récamier's bank had its first setback, revealing a liability for 21 million francs - the banking houses of  Louis Bunel, Bastide, Vanlerberghe, Ouvrard and finally Médard Desprez also faced ultimately terminal difficulties between 1806 and 1807. Their bankruptcy was analysed by Louis Bergeron and revealed Récamier's bank tended to take on too many risks and to be over-reliant on international trade, meaning it suffered under the Continental System and Britain's maritime blockade. Récamier resigned as régent of the Banque de France in October 1806 but received no support from his friends there, since his name was linked with opponents of Napoleon's regime. His properties on rue du Mont-Blanc were sold for 400000 francs to the rich grocer François-Dominique Mosselman, who was based in a building opposite Ponceau's on rue Saint-Denis. The couple later moved into a more modest house at 19 rue du Mail. Between 1807 and 1808 his wife refused to enter Napoleon's court and so she and her husband were ordered to leave Paris by the police. He tried to rebuild his fortunes and call in many debts, including debts to the state, but instead, he was declared bankrupt a second time and died without issue in 1830.
Bibliography
Romuald Szramkiewicz, Les Régents et censeurs de la Banque de France nommés sous le Consulat et l'Empire, coll. « Hautes études médiévales et modernes » n°22, Genève, Droz, 1974 ISBN 978-2600033732.
Louis Bergeron (1978), Banquiers, négociants et manufacturiers parisiens du Directoire à l’Empire, Éditions EHESS, 1999 ISBN 978-2-7132-1285-7 read online.


== References ==

Juliette Récamier
Later years
Récamier's husband had sustained heavy financial losses in 1805, and she visited Germaine de Staël at Coppet in Switzerland. There was a project for her divorce, in order that she might marry Prince Augustus of Prussia, but, though her husband was willing, it was not arranged. In her later days she lost most of what was left of her fortune; but she continued to receive visitors in her apartment at Abbaye-aux-Bois, a 17th-century convent (demolished in 1907) situated at 16 rue de Sèvres in Paris, to which she retired in 1819.
Despite old age, ill-health, partial blindness, and reduced circumstances, Récamier never lost her attractiveness, though at least one man who met her, artist Guillaume Gavarni, opined that she "stank of the lower middle class." And although she numbered among her admirers the Mathieu de Montmorency, Lucien Bonaparte, Prince Augustus of Prussia (whose proposal was accepted but the marriage never occurred), Pierre-Simon Ballanche, Jean-Jacques Ampère, and Benjamin Constant, none of them obtained over her so great an influence as did Chateaubriand, though she suffered much from his imperious temper. If she had any genuine affection, it seems to have been for the baron de Barante, whom she met at Coppet.In 1849, Récamier died in Paris of cholera at the age of 71 and was buried in the Cimetière de Montmartre in Montmartre, at the time a village north of Paris.
Cultural legacy
A type of sofa or chaise longue on which she liked to recline, the récamier, was named after her.She was the subject of two silent films. A 1920 German film Madame Récamier starring Fern Andra and a 1928 French film Madame Récamier.

François-Joseph Talma
Life
He was born in Paris.  His father, a dentist, moved to London, and saw that his son received a good English education.  François Joseph returned to Paris, where for a year and a half he himself practised dentistry. His predilection for the stage was cultivated in amateur theatricals, and on 21 November 1787 he made his debut at the Comédie-Française as Seide in Voltaire's Mahomet. His efforts from the first won approval, but for a considerable time he only obtained secondary parts.It was as a juvenile lead that he first came to prominence, and he only gradually achieved his unrivalled position as the exponent of strong and concentrated passion. Talma was among the earliest advocates of realism in scenery and costume, being aided by his friend, the painter Jacques-Louis David. His first step in this direction was to appear in the small role of Proculus in Voltaire's Brutus, with a toga and short Roman haircut, much to the surprise of an audience accustomed to 18th century costume on stage, regardless of whether it suited the part played. 
He is often credited with having introduced the male Neoclassical hairstyle.

Talma possessed the physical gifts to enable him to excel, a striking appearance and a voice of beauty and power, which he gradually trained to perfection. At first somewhat stilted and monotonous in his manner, he came to be regarded as a model of simplicity. Talma married Julie Carreau, a rich and talented lady whose salon attracted the principal Girondists. The actor was an intimate friend of Napoleon Bonaparte, who delighted in his society, and even, on his return from Elba, forgave him for performing before Louis XVIII. In 1808 the emperor had taken him to Erfurt and made him play the Mort de Cesar to a company of crowned heads. Five years later he took him to Dresden.Talma was also a friend of Joseph Chénier, Georges Danton, Camille Desmoulins and other revolutionists. It was in Chenier's anti-monarchical Charles IX, produced on 4 November 1789, that a prophetic couplet on the destruction of the Bastille made the house burst into a salvo of applause, led by Mirabeau. This play was responsible for the political dissensions in the Comédie-Française which resulted in the establishment, under Talma, of a new theatre.By the 1820s, Talma was established as "the dominant personality at the Comédie-Française, where he alone could still successfully impose classical tragedy upon the public".  It was at this time that a young Alexandre Dumas, on one of his first visits to Paris, was inspired by a performance by Talma.
In The Case of Wagner, Nietzsche references one of Talma's dictums while derisively characterizing Wagner as an actor, and not a musician:

       
One is an actor by virtue of being ahead of mankind in one insight:  what is meant to have the effect of truth must not be true.  The proposition was formulated by Talma; it contains the whole psychology of the actor; it also contains--we need not doubt it--his morality.  Wagner's music is never true.
     But it is taken for true; and thus it is in order.

